Add step-by-step tutorial for adding a new dialect (#943)
PennyLaneAI/catalyst: doc/dev/dialects.rst

- `built-in MLIR dialects <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/>`_: A list of dialects and
  associated documentation for dialects developed with the MLIR project or contributed upstream.
- `defining MLIR dialects <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/DefiningDialects/>`_: Documentation describing
  how to define MLIR dialects and all its components.
- `debugging tips <https://mlir.llvm.org/getting_started/Debugging/>`_: Useful reference for any
  kind of MLIR development, especially the debugging flags for `mlir-opt` like tools.

The remainder of this document will guide you through, in concrete terms, how to add a new dialect
to Catalyst.

Catalyst dialect structure
==========================

A strong design principle in the MLIR project is the avoidance of boilerplate and redundant code,
favoring a single source of truth to specify IR components. This is achieved via one or more
descriptive languages based on the `TableGen <https://llvm.org/docs/TableGen/index.html>`_ format
known from LLVM. Consequently, dialects, as well as many operations, types, attributes, and other
IR objects, are specified in two parts:

> - a *declarative* part: The main way to define new IR objects via a simple language called

Reviewer: Minor/optional: bolding the text will help it stand out more, making it easier to parse/skim read
```suggestion
- **a declarative part**: The main way to define new IR objects via a simple language called
```

  `Operation Definition Specification (ODS) <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/DefiningDialects/Operations/>`_.
  ODS specifications live in TableGen (``.td``) files, which will automatically generate both C++
  header and implementation files via the build system.

> In Catalyst, TableGen files for dialects can be found in the public include directory, under
> `catalyst/mlir/include/\<DialectName\>/IR <https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/tree/main/mlir/include/Quantum/IR>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In Catalyst, TableGen files for dialects can be found in the public include directory, under
  `catalyst/mlir/include/\<DialectName\>/IR <https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/tree/main/mlir/include/Quantum/IR>`_.
```

Reviewer: This will make it render like so, which is a bit easier to read (since the 'two parts' are side by side) 
<img width="850" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5c79adee-7424-4ad7-89e3-69b0dbc5f7e4">

> - a *C++* part: Additional hand-written logic, and most transformations, are defined directly in C++

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **a C++ part**: Additional hand-written logic, and most transformations, are defined directly in C++
```

  source files. An example might be a storage class for a data type, or the implementation of
  interface methods for an operation declared in ODS.
  Note that while the usage of ODS is strongly recommended, full control over the underlying
  objects can always be achieved by directly working with the relevant C++ classes.

> In Catalyst, hand-written implementations for classes & methods can be found in the source
> directory, under `catalyst/mlir/lib\/<DialectName\>/IR <https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/tree/main/mlir/lib/Quantum/IR>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In Catalyst, hand-written implementations for classes & methods can be found in the source
  directory, under `catalyst/mlir/lib\/<DialectName\>/IR <https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/tree/main/mlir/lib/Quantum/IR>`_.
```

An alternative tutorial on creating a basic MLIR dialect can also be found in the official docs, see
`Creating a Dialect <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Tutorials/CreatingADialect/>`_.

Creating a new dialect
======================

Let's see how we can add a new dialect to Catalyst, using OpenQASM as an example! Note that all
auto-generated files and build artifacts mentioned in the guide will only appear at the end of
the `Using the dialect <#using-the-dialect>`_ section when the ``make dialects`` command is run.

Start by creating a new TableGen file, located at ``mlir/include/OpenQASM/OpenQASM.td``, with the
following content:

> .. code-block:: tablegen

Reviewer: coming soon! https://github.com/pygments/pygments/pull/2751

Author: Yeah saw that 😅 Still no sign of MLIR though :(

        let cppNamespace = "::catalyst::openqasm";

        /// Use the default type printing/parsing hooks, otherwise we would explicitly define them.
        let useDefaultTypePrinterParser = 1;
    }

Note the use of ``def`` in TableGen indicates that we are defining a new type of object - under the
hood this results in a new C++ class. To avoid repeating common parts of object definitions, this
object creation mechanism itself supports classes. ``def OpenQASMDialect : Dialect`` defines an
instance of the (built-in) ``Dialect`` TableGen type. In this way, ``OpenQASMDialect`` will inherit
all properties defined for the ``Dialect`` type.

We could also have subtyped the ``Dialect`` type with ``class QuantumDialect : Dialect``, and then
created two kinds of quantum dialects as ``def OpenQASMDialect : QuantumDialect`` and
``def QIRDialect : QuantumDialect`` - if we thought that the two shared some common elements.
Objects defined with ``def`` are terminal and can no longer be subtyped or inherited from.

Similarly, a new data type for our dialect can be added by via the built-in ``TypeDef`` class:

.. code-block:: tablegen

>     include "mlir/IR/AttrTypeBase.td"

Reviewer: are these three tablegen codeblocks different files?

Author: Same file, I just think it would be easier to explain the parts separately.

Reviewer: ah okay, might be worth adding a comment on that (unless I missed it). The `include` made me think it was a new file (since you usually see them at the top of files)

Author: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/943/commits/fbed8e4f8353c9465d63fb820948f9378cb52588

        );

        let assemblyFormat = [{
            `(` $theta `)` $qubit attr-dict `:` type($qubit)
        }];
    }

Operations are primarily defined via their *arguments* and *results*. In the IR, argument & result
values are what organize operations into a graph (the so-called SSA graph), which encodes the flow
of data through the program. The MLIR guide
`Understanding the IR Structure <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Tutorials/UnderstandingTheIRStructure>`_
can be helpful in obtaining a deeper understanding of this concept.

Further, operations can define nested regions with additional operations. How the nested region
will be executed is entirely up to the operation and its lowering mechanism. The concept of nesting
operations is used in many places in MLIR. The built-in operations ``module`` and ``func`` are
themselves just implemented as regular operations with a nested region. The structured control flow
dialect (SCF) also uses it to represent branching and looping in a much more intuitive fashion
than LLVM.

Lastly, we also defined a custom syntax (``assemblyFormat``) for our operation. MLIR provides two ways
of representing operations in its textual assembly format:

> - *generic assembly format*: This format is a one-to-one mapping from how MLIR objects are
>   represented in memory, and contains all necessary information to uniquely represent an MLIR
>   program with it. As a consequence, this format can be used to parse and print operations from any
>   dialect, even unknown ones!
> 
> The above format can be very useful for debugging, as it more truthfully represents the IR state. It
> also suffers less from crashing in the case of an invalid IR state.
> 
> - *pretty assembly format*: This format can be fully customized (with some restrictions) by the
>   dialect designer. Generally speaking the IR can be much more human-readable when printed in this
>   form. Common improvements include imitating a particular syntax (e.g. indexed array access),
>   structuring operands into groups, and omitting redundant type information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **generic assembly format**: This format is a one-to-one mapping from how MLIR objects are
  represented in memory, and contains all necessary information to uniquely represent an MLIR
  program with it. As a consequence, this format can be used to parse and print operations from any
  dialect, even unknown ones!

  The generic assembly format can be very useful for debugging, as it more truthfully represents the IR state. It
also suffers less from crashing in the case of an invalid IR state.

- **pretty assembly format**: This format can be fully customized (with some restrictions) by the
  dialect designer. Generally speaking the IR can be much more human-readable when printed in this
  form. Common improvements include imitating a particular syntax (e.g. indexed array access),
  structuring operands into groups, and omitting redundant type information.
```

the transformed program back out. Parsing and printing out a program without any transformations
is also referred to as "round-tripping". Let's see if we can pass this first test with our dialect!

Catalyst comes with its own version of the opt tool, ``quantum-opt``, preloaded with all builtin
MLIR dialects and transformations, as well all additional compiler components developed for
Catalyst specifically. Find the file located at ``mlir/tools/quantum-opt/quantum-opt.cpp`` and add
the following two lines to it:

.. code-block:: c++

    // ...
    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASM.h"  // add me

    int main(int argc, char **argv)
    {
        // ...
        registry.insert<catalyst::openqasm::OpenQASMDialect>();  // add me

        // ...
    }

Similarly, update the corresponding ``mlir/tools/quantum-opt/CMakeLists.txt`` to include the build
target for our dialect as a dependent library:

.. code-block:: cmake

    # ...
    set(LIBS
        # ...
        MLIROpenQASM  # add me
    )

    # ...

That's it! We can now build our additions with ``make dialects`` (assuming the project was already

> successfully built once) and test them out.

Reviewer: For important commands that we want the reader to run, I recommend having them as their own code-blocks rather than as inline code, as it will be easier to spot

Author: ```suggestion
That's it! We can now build our additions with the rest of the dialects and test them out. Assuming
Catalyst has already been built successfully at least once, simply run:

.. code-block:: console

    make dialects
```

Save the following test file somewhere and run it through the ``quantum-opt`` tool:

> .. code-block:: mlir

Reviewer: Doesn't look like there are any mlir lexers yet, but I found two gists we could add manually:

- https://gist.github.com/makslevental/1f7f484b5fe09c8cb9c9e4ff7748644a
- https://gist.github.com/oowekyala/110dacc9343dbc1b86b452902d7dc553

Author: Do you know to add these? :)

Reviewer: Not off the top of my head, but there should be a way of adding them to our `doc/` folder, and registering them with Sphinx.

Author: discussed as out of scope

    func.func @my_circuit(%q0 : !oq.qubit) {
        %phi = arith.constant 0.3 : f64

        oq.RZ(%phi) %q0 : !oq.qubit

        func.return
    }

.. code-block:: console

    ./mlir/build/bin/quantum-opt my_test_file.mlir

You should see the same code in the input file printed back out to you:

.. code-block::

    func.func @my_circuit(%q0 : !oq.qubit) {
        %phi = arith.constant 0.3 : f64

        oq.RZ(%phi) %q0 : !oq.qubit

        func.return
    }

.. note::

    If you are encoutering issues, or would like to quickly try out the dialect described in this
    guide, you can have a look at or cherry-pick this commit which includes all changes described

>     above: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/commit/e36d435c209a32f06715f3e34ac896a0a35aa92c

Reviewer: this is a great idea

Build your own
==============

To take your dialect to the next level, be sure to also check out the
`Catalyst transformation guide <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/dev/transforms.html>`_
for information on how to write transformation passes for Catalyst.

For additional inspiration and reference implementations, don't forget to check out the existing

> dialects at `catalyst/mlir/include <https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/tree/main/mlir/include>`_.

Reviewer: nice!

        let name = "oq";

        /// This is the C++ namespace that the dialect, and all sub-components, get placed in.
        let cppNamespace = "::catalyst::openqasm";

        /// Use the default type printing/parsing hooks, otherwise we would explicitly define them.
        let useDefaultTypePrinterParser = 1;
    }

Note the use of ``def`` in TableGen indicates that we are defining a new type of object - under the
hood this results in a new C++ class. To avoid repeating common parts of object definitions, this
object creation mechanism itself supports classes. ``def OpenQASMDialect : Dialect`` defines an
instance of the (built-in) ``Dialect`` TableGen type. In this way, ``OpenQASMDialect`` will inherit
all properties defined for the ``Dialect`` type.

We could also have subtyped the ``Dialect`` type with ``class QuantumDialect : Dialect``, and then
created two kinds of quantum dialects as ``def OpenQASMDialect : QuantumDialect`` and
``def QIRDialect : QuantumDialect`` - if we thought that the two shared some common elements.
Objects defined with ``def`` are terminal and can no longer be subtyped or inherited from.

> Similarly, a new data type for our dialect can be added by via the built-in ``TypeDef`` class:

Author: ```suggestion
Similarly, a new data type for our dialect can be added by via the built-in ``TypeDef`` class
(in the same file):
```

.. code-block:: tablegen

    include "mlir/IR/AttrTypeBase.td"

    class OpenQASM_Type<string name, string nameInIR> : TypeDef<OpenQASMDialect, name, []> {
        let mnemonic = nameInIR;
    }

    def QubitType : OpenQASM_Type<"Qubit", "qubit"> {
        let summary = "A single quantum bit reference.";
    }

TableGen classes accept parameters in angular brackets (``<>``) that can be used in the definition of
class properties, as well as passed on to parent classes.

.. note::

    Do not confuse TableGen classes with C++ classes. Two TableGen objects that inherit
    from the same TableGen class will not share a common base class in C++!

> Lastly, let's also add an operation to our dialect, which will allow us to run a small example at
> the end.

Author: ```suggestion
Lastly, let's also add an operation to our dialect (again in the same file), which will allow us to
run a small example at the end.
```

Alongside of optimization rules, these processes form the core part of program *compilation*.

For additional information on MLIR dialects, and the type of IR objects provided by MLIR, refer to
the following documentation pages:

- `the MLIR language reference <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/LangRef/>`_: A technical reference for
  the MLIR language (the textual IR format), as well as its concepts and building blocks.
- `built-in MLIR dialects <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/>`_: A list of dialects and
  associated documentation for dialects developed with the MLIR project or contributed upstream.
- `defining MLIR dialects <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/DefiningDialects/>`_: Documentation describing
  how to define MLIR dialects and all its components.
- `debugging tips <https://mlir.llvm.org/getting_started/Debugging/>`_: Useful reference for any
  kind of MLIR development, especially the debugging flags for `mlir-opt` like tools.

The remainder of this document will guide you through, in concrete terms, how to add a new dialect
to Catalyst.

Catalyst dialect structure
==========================

> A strong design principle in the MLIR project is the avoidance of boilerplate and redundant code,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A strong design principle in the MLIR project is the avoidance of boilerplate code,
```

Author: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/943/commits/bb02f80fb30f2b5dadb236411257a8bc19f629ae

An alternative tutorial on creating a basic MLIR dialect can also be found in the official docs, see
`Creating a Dialect <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Tutorials/CreatingADialect/>`_.

Creating a new dialect
======================

Let's see how we can add a new dialect to Catalyst, using OpenQASM as an example! Note that all
auto-generated files and build artifacts mentioned in the guide will only appear at the end of
the `Using the dialect <#using-the-dialect>`_ section when the ``make dialects`` command is run.

Start by creating a new TableGen file, located at ``mlir/include/OpenQASM/OpenQASM.td``, with the
following content:

.. code-block:: tablegen

    include "mlir/IR/DialectBase.td"

    def OpenQASMDialect : Dialect {
        let summary = "An OpenQASM 3 dialect in MLIR.";
        let description = [{
            ...
        }];

        /// This is the namespace of the dialect in MLIR, which is used as a prefix for types and ops.
        let name = "oq";

        /// This is the C++ namespace that the dialect, and all sub-components, get placed in.
        let cppNamespace = "::catalyst::openqasm";

>         /// Use the default type printing/parsing hooks, otherwise we would explicitly define them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        /// Use the default type printing/parsing hooks, otherwise we would have to explicitly define them.
```

Author: ```suggestion
        /// Use the default type printing/parsing hooks, otherwise we would have to explicitly
        /// define them.
```

        let useDefaultTypePrinterParser = 1;
    }

Note the use of ``def`` in TableGen indicates that we are defining a new type of object - under the
hood this results in a new C++ class. To avoid repeating common parts of object definitions, this
object creation mechanism itself supports classes. ``def OpenQASMDialect : Dialect`` defines an
instance of the (built-in) ``Dialect`` TableGen type. In this way, ``OpenQASMDialect`` will inherit
all properties defined for the ``Dialect`` type.

We could also have subtyped the ``Dialect`` type with ``class QuantumDialect : Dialect``, and then
created two kinds of quantum dialects as ``def OpenQASMDialect : QuantumDialect`` and

> ``def QIRDialect : QuantumDialect`` - if we thought that the two shared some common elements.

Reviewer 2: I think the tutorial should remain simple and focused on the OpenQASMDialect. Mentioning the QIRDialect might make think readers it is relevant for the OpenQASMDialect, which I think it is not. I would say creating a hierarchy of classes is out of the scope of this tutorial. What do you think?

Author: The tutorial is not actually about the OpenQASM dialect, it is just an example I am using to teach the concepts of writing a dialect in MLIR.

In this section, I try to explain how tablegen works, and the difference between the `def` and `class` concepts in the language. `QIRDialect` is just a thematically congruent name, but it could be anything else that demonstrates inheritance in the tablegen language.

Let me know if you still think talking about tablegen inheritance is not a good idea here.

Reviewer 2: It's fine :)

Objects defined with ``def`` are terminal and can no longer be subtyped or inherited from.

Similarly, a new data type for our dialect can be added by via the built-in ``TypeDef`` class
(in the same file):

.. code-block:: tablegen

    include "mlir/IR/AttrTypeBase.td"

    class OpenQASM_Type<string name, string nameInIR> : TypeDef<OpenQASMDialect, name, []> {
        let mnemonic = nameInIR;
    }

    def QubitType : OpenQASM_Type<"Qubit", "qubit"> {
        let summary = "A single quantum bit reference.";
    }

> 

Reviewer 2: It might be worth splitting the code that goes to the header and the implementation code, and explicitly state: "first include these files at the header", then state: "add these code to implement this and that". Users might just copy-paste the code blocks, unaware of the separation between include and implementation sections.

Author: What do you mean? I don't think there is any issue mixing `include` commands in-between other tablegen code, if that's what you mean. (the code is meant to be copy-paste-able as is)
And I would much rather have "highly local" code, where you can immediately see why something was included for example, rather than have a big include block at the top that is devoid of context.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense too

can be helpful in obtaining a deeper understanding of this concept.

Further, operations can define nested regions with additional operations. How the nested region
will be executed is entirely up to the operation and its lowering mechanism. The concept of nesting
operations is used in many places in MLIR. The built-in operations ``module`` and ``func`` are
themselves just implemented as regular operations with a nested region. The structured control flow
dialect (SCF) also uses it to represent branching and looping in a much more intuitive fashion
than LLVM.

Lastly, we also defined a custom syntax (``assemblyFormat``) for our operation. MLIR provides two ways
of representing operations in its textual assembly format:

- **generic assembly format**: This format is a one-to-one mapping from how MLIR objects are
  represented in memory, and contains all necessary information to uniquely represent an MLIR
  program with it. As a consequence, this format can be used to parse and print operations from any
  dialect, even unknown ones!

  The generic assembly format can be very useful for debugging, as it more truthfully represents the IR state. It

> also suffers less from crashing in the case of an invalid IR state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 also suffers less from crashing in the case of an invalid IR state.
```

- **pretty assembly format**: This format can be fully customized (with some restrictions) by the
  dialect designer. Generally speaking the IR can be much more human-readable when printed in this
  form. Common improvements include imitating a particular syntax (e.g. indexed array access),
  structuring operands into groups, and omitting redundant type information.

More information on defining operations and other dialect objects can be found in the
`dialects <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/DefiningDialects>`_,
`attributes & types <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/DefiningDialects/AttributesAndTypes/>`_,
and `operations <https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/DefiningDialects/Operations/>`_
pages of the MLIR documentation.

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe you should state which format did you use in the example above?

Author: The example above doesn't really use one or the other, since the assembly formats only come into play when representing IR in its textual form.

MLIR components always have a generic assembly form, and a pretty (custom) assembly form can be optionally defined if desired. Just above I say that we also defined a pretty format for our op when introducing the section about the different formats:
> Lastly, we also defined a custom syntax (``assemblyFormat``) for our operation.

Depending on the features provided by a dialect, you may see additional files here, such as for
attributes, interfaces, and other types of MLIR objects.

The suffix ``.inc`` indicates that the files have been automatically generated, and are by themselves
not sufficient to produce a library with our dialect. Instead, all these files are meant to be
included in a few header and source files of our own.

Let's start with a public header file for our dialect. Other Catalyst code can then include this
header to manipulate objects from our dialect. Create a file ``mlir/include/OpenQASM/OpenQASM.h``
with the following content:

.. code-block:: c++

    #pragma once

    #include "mlir/IR/BuiltinTypes.h"
    #include "mlir/IR/Dialect.h"
    #include "mlir/IR/OpDefinition.h"

    // Dialect header

    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASMDialect.h.inc"

    // Types header

    #define GET_TYPEDEF_CLASSES
    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASMTypes.h.inc"

    // Operations header

    #define GET_OP_CLASSES
    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASM.h.inc"

Here we directly included declarations for all the object types we defined in a single header.

> Note that some auto-generated files allow you selectively include code via pre-processor flags, as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that some auto-generated files allow you to selectively include code via pre-processor flags, as
```

done here for types and operations. It can be a good idea to directly look into ``.inc`` to understand
the type of code they provide.

Lastly, let's create a main source file for our dialect at ``mlir/lib/OpenQASM/OpenQASM.cpp``:

.. code-block:: c++

    #include "mlir/IR/Builders.h"
    #include "mlir/IR/DialectImplementation.h"
    #include "mlir/IR/OpImplementation.h"
    #include "llvm/ADT/TypeSwitch.h"

    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASM.h"

    using namespace mlir;
    using namespace catalyst::openqasm;

    // Dialect source

    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASMDialect.cpp.inc"

    void OpenQASMDialect::initialize()
    {
        addTypes<
    #define GET_TYPEDEF_LIST
    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASMTypes.cpp.inc"
            >();

        addOperations<
    #define GET_OP_LIST
    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASM.cpp.inc"
            >();
    }

    // Types source

    #define GET_TYPEDEF_CLASSES
    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASMTypes.cpp.inc"

    // Operations source

    #define GET_OP_CLASSES
    #include "OpenQASM/OpenQASM.cpp.inc"

> Besides ensuring the right MLIR headers for our code are included, we mainly need to insert all the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides ensuring that the right MLIR headers for our code are included, we mainly need to insert all the
```

``MLIROpenQASMIncGen`` is a target automatically provided by the `add_mlir_dialect` function from the
provided TableGen file name (``OpenQASM``). The latter represents the generation of C++ files from
TableGen.

.. warning::

    For any newly added ``CMakeLists.txt``, be sure to add it to its parent CMake file with
    ``add_subdirectory(<name of new folder>)``. In this case, both ``mlir/include/CMakeLists.txt``
    and ``mlir/lib/CMakeLists.txt`` will need to be updated with ``add_subdirectory(OpenQASM)``.

Using the dialect
=================

MLIR's standard tool for testing dialects and compiler passes is the ``opt`` tool (inherited from
LLVM). The tool parses a program in the textual MLIR format, applies arbitrary passes, and prints
the transformed program back out. Parsing and printing out a program without any transformations
is also referred to as "round-tripping". Let's see if we can pass this first test with our dialect!

Catalyst comes with its own version of the opt tool, ``quantum-opt``, preloaded with all builtin
MLIR dialects and transformations, as well all additional compiler components developed for

> Catalyst specifically. Find the file located at ``mlir/tools/quantum-opt/quantum-opt.cpp`` and add

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Catalyst specifically. Add the following lines to the ``mlir/tools/quantum-opt/quantum-opt.cpp`` file:
```

> the following two lines to it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    {
        // ...
        registry.insert<catalyst::openqasm::OpenQASMDialect>();  // add me

        // ...
    }

Similarly, update the corresponding ``mlir/tools/quantum-opt/CMakeLists.txt`` to include the build
target for our dialect as a dependent library:

.. code-block:: cmake

    # ...
    set(LIBS
        # ...
        MLIROpenQASM  # add me
    )

    # ...

That's it! We can now build our additions with the rest of the dialects and test them out. Assuming
Catalyst has already been built successfully at least once, simply run:

.. code-block:: console

    make dialects

Save the following test file somewhere and run it through the ``quantum-opt`` tool:

.. code-block:: mlir

    func.func @my_circuit(%q0 : !oq.qubit) {
        %phi = arith.constant 0.3 : f64

        oq.RZ(%phi) %q0 : !oq.qubit

        func.return
    }

.. code-block:: console

    ./mlir/build/bin/quantum-opt my_test_file.mlir

You should see the same code in the input file printed back out to you:

.. code-block::

    func.func @my_circuit(%q0 : !oq.qubit) {
        %phi = arith.constant 0.3 : f64

        oq.RZ(%phi) %q0 : !oq.qubit

        func.return
    }

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
module {
  func.func @my_circuit(%arg0: !oq.qubit) {
    %cst = arith.constant 3.000000e-01 : f64
    oq.RZ(%cst) %arg0 : !oq.qubit
    return
  }
}
```

Reviewer 2: That was the actual output in my machine, variable names were changed, as well as the float value notation, among other things. No big deal but might be worth mentioning that refactoring.

Author: True, there can be small changes (like the implicit module op being printed, and SSA names which are not part of the IR and thus are not preserved, line breaks which are also not part of the IR, etc). I'll change it to the version you saw :)
